sphinx-doc/source/administration.rst, before:

.. _administering:

Administering a CATMAID Instance
================================

This section presents information on how to update a running CATMAID instance
and how to backup/restore its database. These administrative tasks might be
needed from time to time. Newer versions of CATMAID (obviously) often include
bug fixes and new features.

Often times, administrative tasks require CATMAID to be restarted. Generally, it
is advisable to announce this to active users. The first section has information
on how to see all active connections if ``uwsgi`` is used as application server.

List active connections
-----------------------

If ``uwsgi`` is used as WSGI server, you can get an idea how many active
connections there are to a CATMAID back-end with the ``uwsgitop`` tool. It
has to be installed separately into the ``virtualenv``::

    pip install uwsgitop

Then make sure ``uwsgi`` is configured to export statistics through a socket
file. This can be done by adding the following two lines to the
``uwsgi.ini`` file for the CATMAID setup::

    stats = <path-to-run-dir>/uwsgi-stats.socket
    memory-report = true

Note that ``<path-to-run-dir>`` needs to be writable by the user running
``uwsgi``. Once ``uwsgi`` is restarted and exports the socket file, it can be
queried using ``uwsgitop`` (make sure to have the ``virtualenv`` active)::

    uwsgitop <path-to-run-dir>/uwsgi-stats.socket

It will list cumulative and current statistics for each worker process, which is
useful to gauge the impact of a restart.

Updating to a newer version
---------------------------

Before updating to a newer version, please make sure that CATMAID is
not currently running and that you have a backup of your current
database state.

You may be asked to upgrade the database in the release notes for the
versions between your current and your target version. If this is the
case, follow those instructions first (after doing a database backup and
stopping CATMAID).

Updating a CATMAID instance involves several steps: First move to your
CATMAID instance's root directory. This is also the root of CATMAID's
Git repository::

    cd <LOCAL-CATMAID-PATH>

Next, get the source code version you are interested in. The following
example will update to the current master branch of Git's "origin"
remote::

   git pull origin master

Note that this will merge into your local branch. So if you have local
commits that you want to keep you might want to rebase those on
origin's master branch using the "--rebase" option. If you are familiar
with git branches, you may prefer to switch to the maintenance/RELEASE
branch for your target version (if you do this, you'll switch branches
again the next time you do an upgrade).

Have a careful look at the required steps to update
your current version to the target version. Both ``CHANGELOG.md`` and
``UPDATE.md`` provide this information, the latter in a more condensed
form. It is also available :ref:`here <update>`. If there are extra steps
required, apply them as directed. You should read these for every version
after your current version up to your target version.

Then move into the Django sub-directory::

   cd django

Activate the `virtualenv`::

   source env/bin/activate

Update Python packages::

   pip install -r requirements.txt

Should a database upgrade be required (e.g. Postgres 11 to 12 or PostGIS 2.5 to
3), make sure to upgrade PostGIS first, by installing the new version for the
current database and connect to every (!) database in the cluster and update the
``postgis`` extension like this. This can be skipped if no database upgrade is
required::

  $ sudo -u postgres psql
  > \c catmaid
  > ALTER EXTENSION postgis UPDATE;
  > \c <next-database>
  > ALTER EXT…
  > …

Once done, install the new database version and upgrade the database
cluster using ``pg_upgrade``. Using the ``--link`` option can save time on large
databases and has been robust in our experience. This step can also be skipped,
if no database upgrade is needed.

Synchronize the Django environment with the database::

   ./projects/manage.py migrate

Collect new and changed static files::

   ./projects/manage.py collectstatic -l

Finally, start the CATMAID process, and visit it in your browser to ensure
it is functioning. When done, if you have other work to do on the system, you
can close the virtualenv as follows::

   deactivate

.. note::

   Updating PostGIS on your host system could cause CATMAID to stop working. See
   :ref:`here <faq-postgis-update-problems>` for how to fix this.

.. note::

   Updating from a CATMAID release before 2015.12.21 (with applied database
   migrations) requires to update to release 2015.12.21 first, apply all
   database migrations and then continue with the release you actually want.
   With the newer version, you have to then fake the initial migration:
   ``manage.py migrate catmaid --fake 0001_initial``.

.. _custom-code:

Backup and restore of the database
----------------------------------

There is a dedicated documentation page on this `here <backup>`.

Adding custom code
------------------

CATMAID supports adding custom code to its front end. This can be used to
create custom tools separate from upstream development, which can make
administration easier: To do so, collect your custom JavaScript files in a
folder and add their filenames to the ``settings.py`` array variable
``STATIC_EXTENSION_FILES``, for instance::

    STATIC_EXTENSION_FILES += ('test.js', )

Next you will have to instruct your web-server to make this folder available
through the URL defined in ``STATIC_EXTENSION_URL``, which defaults to
"/staticext/"). CATMAID will then try to load those files after its own files.

.. _performance-tuning:

Performance tuning
------------------

There are various application involved to make CATMAID work: A web-server/load
balancer, a WSGI server to run the Python back-end and a PostgreSQL database
server. The configuration of all of them can be optimized to experience better
performance. The following list of suggestions is not exhaustive and if you have
suggestions we are happy to hear about them.

Operating system and infrastructure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* In conjunction with the shared memory setting of PostgreSQL (see below), one
  should increase the kernel's shared memory limit. It defines how much memory
  can be used as a shared resource by different processes. A rule of thumb is
  that one should use about 25% of the system's RAM, but if the machine is
  equipped with plenty of RAM one should be fine for most setups with 4GB (or
  even less). You can check this kernel setting with ``sysctl kernel.shmmax``.
  The default for most distributions is in the range of kilobytes and megabytes.

* The partition that is hosting the image tiles should be mounted with the
  ``noatime`` option. This makes sure no access time is written every time an
  image file is read. Alternatively, you can use ``chattr`` to set this option
  for individual files and folders.

* If LDAP is used to authenticate users and to check permissions on the server
  CATMAID is running or the image data is loaded from, LDAP queries should be
  cached locally. Otherwise, an LDAP request will be made every time a file is
  accessed.

* If the your server has a lot of memory, the Linux kernel defaults for the
  threshold for writing dirty memory pages to disk are too high (10% of the
  available memory for start writing out, 20% for absolute maximum before I/O
  blocks until write-out is done). To avoid large write-out spikes, it is
  advisable to have the kernel start writing out dirty pages after a lower
  threshold, e.g. 256MB: ``vm.dirty_background_bytes = 268435456``. Also, the
  threshold for the absolute maximum dirty memory threshold before I/O blocks
  until the write-out is finished should be lowered, to e.g. 1GB:
  ``vm.dirty_bytes = 107374182``.

* The kernel should also be discouraged from swapping cached data by setting
  ``vm.swappiness = 10``.

Webserver
^^^^^^^^^

* The access log should be turned off and only critical errors should be written
  to the log. CATMAID can produce a lot of requests and writing every single one
  to disk, especially if multiple users use CATMAID, can be a real performance
  hit.

* Make use of the `HTTP/2 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP/2>`_ protocol.
  Modern browsers and webservers support it and it only requires you to set up
  SSL/TLS as an additional step before activating it. Through multiplexing,
  compression and prioritization, it makes much better use of single connections.
  Requests can be answered more quickly and CATMAID will feel more responsive.

* A cache server like Varnish can be beneficial on the machine that serves the
  image data. If multiple users load the same image data, it will reduce the
  number of times image data has to be loaded from the hard drive.

* Have the webserver transfer data with GZIP. Make sure this includes JSON
  data with the content-type ``application/json`` and binary data with the
  content-type ``application/octet-stream``. In nginx, you can include both by
  adding ``application/json`` and ``application/octet-stream`` to the
  ``gzip_types`` setting.

* The CATMAID web-client can send large requests to the server. Increasing the
  web-server's request buffer can prevent writing such requests temporarily to
  disk. A buffer of 512kB should be plenty. In Nginx, this can be done with
  ``client_body_buffer_size 512k;``

* Request responses generated by CATMAID can be large as well. Increasing the
  webserver's buffers to match common response sizes can increase performance
  quite a bit if the buffer is large enough for the webserver to avoid writing
  CATMAID's response temporarily to a file and clients have access to a fast
  connection. For Nginx this means increasing both ``proxy_buffer_size`` and
  ``proxy_buffers``. The former is used for the response headers only and
  can be (much) lower: ``proxy_buffer_size 64k;``. The latter however defines
  how many buffers of what size can be used for a single connection. For
  instance, if the uncompressed (!) response of a typical spatial query for
  neurons is 1.5-2MB in size, allowing a 2MB proxy buffer per connection would
  help performance. If you have enough memory available, you could set this with
  ``proxy_buffers 512 4k;`` (512 4k pages equals 2MB). Make sure there is enough
  memory available: for 100 active connections this proxy buffer setting would
  require already 2GB.

* The webserver should mark image tiles to not expire so that they can be cached
  by a client. If the image data is public, one could let the webserver also set
  the ``Cache-Control: public`` header for the images.

* To not require clients to ask every minute for particular updates (like new
  messages) use an ASGI server like we describe :ref:`here <websockets>`. This
  reduces some basline level of requests.

Database management system
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* PostgresSQL's shared memory setting should match what is allowed by the
  kernel. So if you set your kernel to allow 4GB (see above), Postgres should
  use make use of it. This can be adjusted with the setting ``shared_buffers`` in
  ``postgresql.conf``.

* Keeping statistics of the CATMAID tables up to date is very important. These
  statistics are used by the query planer to decide about the optimal
  realization of a query. This can be done manually by calling ``VACUUM
  ANALYZE`` while being connected to the CATMAID database in a psql shell. It is
  also possible (and advisable) to automate this with by setting ``autovacuum =
  on`` in ``postgresql.conf``.

* According to the `Django manual
  <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.6/ref/databases/#optimizing-postgresql-s-configuration>`_,
  Django expects the following parameters for its database connections:
  ``client_encoding: 'UTF8'``,  ``default_transaction_isolation: 'read committed'``
  and ``timezone: 'UTC'`` when ``USE_TZ`` is True, value of ``TIME_ZONE``
  otherwise (``USE_TZ`` is CATMAID's default). All of these settings
  can be configured in ``postgresql.conf`` or more conveniently per database
  user with `ALTER ROLE <http://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/interactive/sql-alterrole.html>`_.
  If these parameters are not the default, Django will do some additional
  queries to set these parameters for each new connection.  Having those
  defaults set will improve the database performance slightly.

* We found that making JIT compilation of queries less likely, helps with many
  spatial queries, where cost estimates aren't very reliable in many cases. This
  can be done by raising the default value for the ``jit_above_cost`` (100,000)
  variable in the ``postgresql.conf`` file to a value of 1,000,000 or even
  higher::

    jit_above_cost = 1000000

CATMAID
^^^^^^^

* Make sure CATMAID is not running in debug mode by checking ``settings.py`` in
  ``django/projects/mysite``: It should contain ``DEBUG = False``. If you get a
  `Bad Request (400)` response, make sure you have set your ``ALLOWED_HOSTS``
  setting in the ``settings.py`` file correct.

* Set `Django's <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.6/ref/databases/#persistent-connections>`_
  ``CONN_MAX_AGE`` option in the database settings of your ``settings.py`` file,
  if you don't use a greenlet based threading model for your WSGI server's
  workers (see `here <https://github.com/benoitc/gunicorn/issues/996>`_ for an
  explanation). This setting controls how long (in seconds) a database
  connection can be re-used. In the default configuration, this is set to ``0``,
  which causes every request to use a new database connection. To test if this
  setting can be used in your environment, set it to a value like ``60`` and
  monitor the number of database connections (e.g. with ``SELECT count(*) FROM
  pg_stat_activity;``). If this number matches your number of WSGI workers (plus
  your own ``psql`` connection), everything is fine. If the number increases
  over time, you should set ``CONN_MAX_AGE`` back to ``0``, because new
  connections are apparently not closed anymore (which can happen with greenlet
  based threading).

* If database connection pooling is used (see ``CONN_MAX_AGE`` above), it can
  help spatial query  performance to use prepared statements. These are created
  for each database connection and pose an overhead without connection pooling.
  To enable prepared statement add ``PREPARED_STATEMENTS = True`` to the
  ``settings.py`` file.

* Depending on the number of nodes per section, using a different spatial query
  type can help performance. By default CATMAID uses the so called ``postgis3d``
  node provider as query strategy. This can be changed to the alternative
  ``postgis2d`` node provider by adding ``NODE_PROVIDER = 'postgis2d'`` to the
  ``settings.py`` file. It is also possible to cache larger field of views on
  tracing data and only update this cache periodically. This can improve
  performance dramatically. Read more about it :ref:`here <node_providers>`.

* If there are too many nodes to be displayed with usable performance, the
  number of returned nodes can be limited. This can be done by setting
  ``NODE_LIST_MAXIMUM_COUNT = <number>`` in the ``settings.py`` file to a
  maximum number of nodes to be queried (e.g. 20000). If however a node limit is
  not really needed and most requests don't hit it, setting
  ``NODE_LIST_MAXIMUM_COUNT`` to ``None`` can slightly improve performance, too.

* If neuron reconstruction statistics are slow to compute, consider running the
  management command ``manage.py catmaid_refresh_node_statistics`` to populate
  an optional statistics summary table. Consider running this command regularly
  over, e.g. over night using Celery or a cron job.

* If large client requests result in status 400 errors, you might need to raise
  the ``DATA_UPLOAD_MAX_MEMORY_SIZE`` setting, which is the maximum allowed
  request body size in bytes. It defaults to 10 MB (83886080).

* Consider using node grid cache for large tracing data set, which can speed up
  loading and supports level-of-detail as well as dynamic updates based on
  database events. Automatic cache updates require ``SPATIAL_UPDATE_NOTIFICATIONS``
  to be set to true in ``settings.py`` (default). If caching is not an option,
  make sure to set ``SPATIAL_UPDATE_NOTIFICATIONS = False`` if you deal with
  large skeletons (>50k nodes) to make operations like joins faster.

Making CATMAID available through SSL
------------------------------------

By default the connection between the CATMAID server and a browser is
unencrypted. This means data can be read and manipulated on the way between both
sides. To protect sensitive data like passwords and to improve security as a whole,
it is recommended to use SSL/TLS to encrypt this communication. Below you will
find notes on how to do this with Nginx.

The webserver is the first place where the configuration has to be changed.
Given that you created a certificate and key file, you would add the following
to your Nginx server configuration::

    server {
        listen 443;
        ...

        ssl on;
        ssl_certificate /etc/nginx/ssl/server.crt;
        ssl_certificate_key /etc/nginx/ssl/server.key;
        ssl_prefer_server_ciphers on;
        ssl_protocols TLSv1.2 TLSv1.3;
        ssl_ciphers "EECDH+ECDSA+AESGCM:EECDH+aRSA+AESGCM:EECDH+ECDSA+SHA256:EECDH+aRSA+SHA256:EECDH+ECDSA+SHA384:EECDH+ECDSA+SHA256:EECDH+aRSA+SHA384:EDH+aRSA+AESGCM:EDH+aRSA+SHA256:EDH+aRSA:EECDH:!aNULL:!eNULL:!MEDIUM:!LOW:!3DES:!MD5:!EXP:!PSK:!SRP:!DSS:!RC4:!SEED";

        ...
    }

If you refer to certificates and keys in Nginx that it didn't know before, you
have to restart it (instead of reloading the configuration). The reason is that
the Nginx process drops privileges after loading and root permissions are
required to read the certificates and keys.

A good resource to test your configuration and to disable weak ciphers is
`Qualys SSL Labs <https://www.ssllabs.com/ssltest/>`_.

Django's ``settings.py`` has to be updated as well to make sure it will only
hand out session cookies and CSRF tokens on a secure connection::

    # This CATMAID instance is served through SSL/TLS. Therefore, send session
    # cookies only over HTTPS and don't add CSRF tokens for non-HTTPS connections.
    SESSION_COOKIE_SECURE = True
    CSRF_COOKIE_SECURE = True
    # Assume a secure connection, if the X-FORWARDED-PROTO header is set to
    # 'https'. This implies that one has to make sure this head is only set to
    # 'https' if the connection is actually secure.
    SECURE_PROXY_SSL_HEADER = ('HTTP_X_FORWARDED_PROTO', 'https')

Please make also make sure that
you override the ``X-Forwarded-Proto`` header passed to Django. It should only
contain "https" if the connection is actually secure. Consult the `Django
documentation
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.6/ref/settings/#std:setting-SECURE_PROXY_SSL_HEADER>`_
to read more about this.

With this you should be able to provide a secure connection to your CATMAID
server.

Commit message:

Upgrade Postgres requirement from v12 to v13 plus PostGIS from v2.5 to v3.1
PostGIS is updated to make use of some improvements for the ND box
operator and 3D support for ST_ClusterKMeans as well as some performance
improvements.

While we don't use any Postgres 13 features yet, there are some useful
speed and memory use updates like B-tree deduplication, incremental
sorting and parallel index vacuum. There are also better extended
statistics available, which are already being tested in a separate
branch. Having this requirement will also allow us to use other new
database features, if appropriate.

Effectively, this commit changes the documentation to reflect this new
requirement as well as the Docker image. Changes that will actually
break setups using Postgres 12 won't be merged very soon. Therefore,
Postgres 12 will continue to work for the time being and so will
Postgres 3.0.

Reindexing the database will apply Postgres 13's new index
deduplication. In the FAFBv14 database this will turn 56 GB worth of
indexes into 38 GB. It will also help using some PostGIS index
improvements.

sphinx-doc/source/administration.rst, after:

.. _administering:

Administering a CATMAID Instance
================================

This section presents information on how to update a running CATMAID instance
and how to backup/restore its database. These administrative tasks might be
needed from time to time. Newer versions of CATMAID (obviously) often include
bug fixes and new features.

Often times, administrative tasks require CATMAID to be restarted. Generally, it
is advisable to announce this to active users. The first section has information
on how to see all active connections if ``uwsgi`` is used as application server.

List active connections
-----------------------

If ``uwsgi`` is used as WSGI server, you can get an idea how many active
connections there are to a CATMAID back-end with the ``uwsgitop`` tool. It
has to be installed separately into the ``virtualenv``::

    pip install uwsgitop

Then make sure ``uwsgi`` is configured to export statistics through a socket
file. This can be done by adding the following two lines to the
``uwsgi.ini`` file for the CATMAID setup::

    stats = <path-to-run-dir>/uwsgi-stats.socket
    memory-report = true

Note that ``<path-to-run-dir>`` needs to be writable by the user running
``uwsgi``. Once ``uwsgi`` is restarted and exports the socket file, it can be
queried using ``uwsgitop`` (make sure to have the ``virtualenv`` active)::

    uwsgitop <path-to-run-dir>/uwsgi-stats.socket

It will list cumulative and current statistics for each worker process, which is
useful to gauge the impact of a restart.

Updating to a newer version
---------------------------

Before updating to a newer version, please make sure that CATMAID is
not currently running and that you have a backup of your current
database state.

You may be asked to upgrade the database in the release notes for the
versions between your current and your target version. If this is the
case, follow those instructions first (after doing a database backup and
stopping CATMAID).

Updating a CATMAID instance involves several steps: First move to your
CATMAID instance's root directory. This is also the root of CATMAID's
Git repository::

    cd <LOCAL-CATMAID-PATH>

Next, get the source code version you are interested in. The following
example will update to the current master branch of Git's "origin"
remote::

   git pull origin master

Note that this will merge into your local branch. So if you have local
commits that you want to keep you might want to rebase those on
origin's master branch using the "--rebase" option. If you are familiar
with git branches, you may prefer to switch to the maintenance/RELEASE
branch for your target version (if you do this, you'll switch branches
again the next time you do an upgrade).

Have a careful look at the required steps to update
your current version to the target version. Both ``CHANGELOG.md`` and
``UPDATE.md`` provide this information, the latter in a more condensed
form. It is also available :ref:`here <update>`. If there are extra steps
required, apply them as directed. You should read these for every version
after your current version up to your target version.

Then move into the Django sub-directory::

   cd django

Activate the `virtualenv`::

   source env/bin/activate

Update Python packages::

   pip install -r requirements.txt

Should a database upgrade be required (e.g. Postgres 12 to 13 or PostGIS 2.5 to
3), make sure to upgrade PostGIS first in the current database (to the same
version of the target database), by installing the new version for the current
database and connect to every (!) database in the cluster and update the
``postgis`` extension like this. This can be skipped if no database upgrade is
required::

  $ sudo -u postgres psql
  > \c catmaid
  > ALTER EXTENSION postgis UPDATE;
  > SELECT postgis_extensions_upgrade();
  > \c <next-database>
  > ALTER EXT…
  > …

Once done, install the new database version and upgrade the database
cluster using ``pg_upgrade``. Using the ``--link`` option can save time on large
databases and has been robust in our experience. This step can also be skipped,
if no database upgrade is needed.

Synchronize the Django environment with the database::

   ./projects/manage.py migrate

Collect new and changed static files::

   ./projects/manage.py collectstatic -l

Finally, start the CATMAID process, and visit it in your browser to ensure
it is functioning. When done, if you have other work to do on the system, you
can close the virtualenv as follows::

   deactivate

.. note::

   Updating PostGIS on your host system could cause CATMAID to stop working. See
   :ref:`here <faq-postgis-update-problems>` for how to fix this.

.. note::

   Updating from a CATMAID release before 2015.12.21 (with applied database
   migrations) requires to update to release 2015.12.21 first, apply all
   database migrations and then continue with the release you actually want.
   With the newer version, you have to then fake the initial migration:
   ``manage.py migrate catmaid --fake 0001_initial``.

.. _custom-code:

Backup and restore of the database
----------------------------------

There is a dedicated documentation page on this `here <backup>`.

Adding custom code
------------------

CATMAID supports adding custom code to its front end. This can be used to
create custom tools separate from upstream development, which can make
administration easier: To do so, collect your custom JavaScript files in a
folder and add their filenames to the ``settings.py`` array variable
``STATIC_EXTENSION_FILES``, for instance::

    STATIC_EXTENSION_FILES += ('test.js', )

Next you will have to instruct your web-server to make this folder available
through the URL defined in ``STATIC_EXTENSION_URL``, which defaults to
"/staticext/"). CATMAID will then try to load those files after its own files.

.. _performance-tuning:

Performance tuning
------------------

There are various application involved to make CATMAID work: A web-server/load
balancer, a WSGI server to run the Python back-end and a PostgreSQL database
server. The configuration of all of them can be optimized to experience better
performance. The following list of suggestions is not exhaustive and if you have
suggestions we are happy to hear about them.

Operating system and infrastructure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* In conjunction with the shared memory setting of PostgreSQL (see below), one
  should increase the kernel's shared memory limit. It defines how much memory
  can be used as a shared resource by different processes. A rule of thumb is
  that one should use about 25% of the system's RAM, but if the machine is
  equipped with plenty of RAM one should be fine for most setups with 4GB (or
  even less). You can check this kernel setting with ``sysctl kernel.shmmax``.
  The default for most distributions is in the range of kilobytes and megabytes.

* The partition that is hosting the image tiles should be mounted with the
  ``noatime`` option. This makes sure no access time is written every time an
  image file is read. Alternatively, you can use ``chattr`` to set this option
  for individual files and folders.

* If LDAP is used to authenticate users and to check permissions on the server
  CATMAID is running or the image data is loaded from, LDAP queries should be
  cached locally. Otherwise, an LDAP request will be made every time a file is
  accessed.

* If the your server has a lot of memory, the Linux kernel defaults for the
  threshold for writing dirty memory pages to disk are too high (10% of the
  available memory for start writing out, 20% for absolute maximum before I/O
  blocks until write-out is done). To avoid large write-out spikes, it is
  advisable to have the kernel start writing out dirty pages after a lower
  threshold, e.g. 256MB: ``vm.dirty_background_bytes = 268435456``. Also, the
  threshold for the absolute maximum dirty memory threshold before I/O blocks
  until the write-out is finished should be lowered, to e.g. 1GB:
  ``vm.dirty_bytes = 107374182``.

* The kernel should also be discouraged from swapping cached data by setting
  ``vm.swappiness = 10``.

Webserver
^^^^^^^^^

* The access log should be turned off and only critical errors should be written
  to the log. CATMAID can produce a lot of requests and writing every single one
  to disk, especially if multiple users use CATMAID, can be a real performance
  hit.

* Make use of the `HTTP/2 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP/2>`_ protocol.
  Modern browsers and webservers support it and it only requires you to set up
  SSL/TLS as an additional step before activating it. Through multiplexing,
  compression and prioritization, it makes much better use of single connections.
  Requests can be answered more quickly and CATMAID will feel more responsive.

* A cache server like Varnish can be beneficial on the machine that serves the
  image data. If multiple users load the same image data, it will reduce the
  number of times image data has to be loaded from the hard drive.

* Have the webserver transfer data with GZIP. Make sure this includes JSON
  data with the content-type ``application/json`` and binary data with the
  content-type ``application/octet-stream``. In nginx, you can include both by
  adding ``application/json`` and ``application/octet-stream`` to the
  ``gzip_types`` setting.

* The CATMAID web-client can send large requests to the server. Increasing the
  web-server's request buffer can prevent writing such requests temporarily to
  disk. A buffer of 512kB should be plenty. In Nginx, this can be done with
  ``client_body_buffer_size 512k;``

* Request responses generated by CATMAID can be large as well. Increasing the
  webserver's buffers to match common response sizes can increase performance
  quite a bit if the buffer is large enough for the webserver to avoid writing
  CATMAID's response temporarily to a file and clients have access to a fast
  connection. For Nginx this means increasing both ``proxy_buffer_size`` and
  ``proxy_buffers``. The former is used for the response headers only and
  can be (much) lower: ``proxy_buffer_size 64k;``. The latter however defines
  how many buffers of what size can be used for a single connection. For
  instance, if the uncompressed (!) response of a typical spatial query for
  neurons is 1.5-2MB in size, allowing a 2MB proxy buffer per connection would
  help performance. If you have enough memory available, you could set this with
  ``proxy_buffers 512 4k;`` (512 4k pages equals 2MB). Make sure there is enough
  memory available: for 100 active connections this proxy buffer setting would
  require already 2GB.

* The webserver should mark image tiles to not expire so that they can be cached
  by a client. If the image data is public, one could let the webserver also set
  the ``Cache-Control: public`` header for the images.

* To not require clients to ask every minute for particular updates (like new
  messages) use an ASGI server like we describe :ref:`here <websockets>`. This
  reduces some basline level of requests.

Database management system
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* PostgresSQL's shared memory setting should match what is allowed by the
  kernel. So if you set your kernel to allow 4GB (see above), Postgres should
  use make use of it. This can be adjusted with the setting ``shared_buffers`` in
  ``postgresql.conf``.

* Keeping statistics of the CATMAID tables up to date is very important. These
  statistics are used by the query planer to decide about the optimal
  realization of a query. This can be done manually by calling ``VACUUM
  ANALYZE`` while being connected to the CATMAID database in a psql shell. It is
  also possible (and advisable) to automate this with by setting ``autovacuum =
  on`` in ``postgresql.conf``.

* According to the `Django manual
  <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.6/ref/databases/#optimizing-postgresql-s-configuration>`_,
  Django expects the following parameters for its database connections:
  ``client_encoding: 'UTF8'``,  ``default_transaction_isolation: 'read committed'``
  and ``timezone: 'UTC'`` when ``USE_TZ`` is True, value of ``TIME_ZONE``
  otherwise (``USE_TZ`` is CATMAID's default). All of these settings
  can be configured in ``postgresql.conf`` or more conveniently per database
  user with `ALTER ROLE <http://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/interactive/sql-alterrole.html>`_.
  If these parameters are not the default, Django will do some additional
  queries to set these parameters for each new connection.  Having those
  defaults set will improve the database performance slightly.

* We found that making JIT compilation of queries less likely, helps with many
  spatial queries, where cost estimates aren't very reliable in many cases. This
  can be done by raising the default value for the ``jit_above_cost`` (100,000)
  variable in the ``postgresql.conf`` file to a value of 1,000,000 or even
  higher::

    jit_above_cost = 1000000

CATMAID
^^^^^^^

* Make sure CATMAID is not running in debug mode by checking ``settings.py`` in
  ``django/projects/mysite``: It should contain ``DEBUG = False``. If you get a
  `Bad Request (400)` response, make sure you have set your ``ALLOWED_HOSTS``
  setting in the ``settings.py`` file correct.

* Set `Django's <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.6/ref/databases/#persistent-connections>`_
  ``CONN_MAX_AGE`` option in the database settings of your ``settings.py`` file,
  if you don't use a greenlet based threading model for your WSGI server's
  workers (see `here <https://github.com/benoitc/gunicorn/issues/996>`_ for an
  explanation). This setting controls how long (in seconds) a database
  connection can be re-used. In the default configuration, this is set to ``0``,
  which causes every request to use a new database connection. To test if this
  setting can be used in your environment, set it to a value like ``60`` and
  monitor the number of database connections (e.g. with ``SELECT count(*) FROM
  pg_stat_activity;``). If this number matches your number of WSGI workers (plus
  your own ``psql`` connection), everything is fine. If the number increases
  over time, you should set ``CONN_MAX_AGE`` back to ``0``, because new
  connections are apparently not closed anymore (which can happen with greenlet
  based threading).

* If database connection pooling is used (see ``CONN_MAX_AGE`` above), it can
  help spatial query  performance to use prepared statements. These are created
  for each database connection and pose an overhead without connection pooling.
  To enable prepared statement add ``PREPARED_STATEMENTS = True`` to the
  ``settings.py`` file.

* Depending on the number of nodes per section, using a different spatial query
  type can help performance. By default CATMAID uses the so called ``postgis3d``
  node provider as query strategy. This can be changed to the alternative
  ``postgis2d`` node provider by adding ``NODE_PROVIDER = 'postgis2d'`` to the
  ``settings.py`` file. It is also possible to cache larger field of views on
  tracing data and only update this cache periodically. This can improve
  performance dramatically. Read more about it :ref:`here <node_providers>`.

* If there are too many nodes to be displayed with usable performance, the
  number of returned nodes can be limited. This can be done by setting
  ``NODE_LIST_MAXIMUM_COUNT = <number>`` in the ``settings.py`` file to a
  maximum number of nodes to be queried (e.g. 20000). If however a node limit is
  not really needed and most requests don't hit it, setting
  ``NODE_LIST_MAXIMUM_COUNT`` to ``None`` can slightly improve performance, too.

* If neuron reconstruction statistics are slow to compute, consider running the
  management command ``manage.py catmaid_refresh_node_statistics`` to populate
  an optional statistics summary table. Consider running this command regularly
  over, e.g. over night using Celery or a cron job.

* If large client requests result in status 400 errors, you might need to raise
  the ``DATA_UPLOAD_MAX_MEMORY_SIZE`` setting, which is the maximum allowed
  request body size in bytes. It defaults to 10 MB (83886080).

* Consider using node grid cache for large tracing data set, which can speed up
  loading and supports level-of-detail as well as dynamic updates based on
  database events. Automatic cache updates require ``SPATIAL_UPDATE_NOTIFICATIONS``
  to be set to true in ``settings.py`` (default). If caching is not an option,
  make sure to set ``SPATIAL_UPDATE_NOTIFICATIONS = False`` if you deal with
  large skeletons (>50k nodes) to make operations like joins faster.

Making CATMAID available through SSL
------------------------------------

By default the connection between the CATMAID server and a browser is
unencrypted. This means data can be read and manipulated on the way between both
sides. To protect sensitive data like passwords and to improve security as a whole,
it is recommended to use SSL/TLS to encrypt this communication. Below you will
find notes on how to do this with Nginx.

The webserver is the first place where the configuration has to be changed.
Given that you created a certificate and key file, you would add the following
to your Nginx server configuration::

    server {
        listen 443;
        ...

        ssl on;
        ssl_certificate /etc/nginx/ssl/server.crt;
        ssl_certificate_key /etc/nginx/ssl/server.key;
        ssl_prefer_server_ciphers on;
        ssl_protocols TLSv1.2 TLSv1.3;
        ssl_ciphers "EECDH+ECDSA+AESGCM:EECDH+aRSA+AESGCM:EECDH+ECDSA+SHA256:EECDH+aRSA+SHA256:EECDH+ECDSA+SHA384:EECDH+ECDSA+SHA256:EECDH+aRSA+SHA384:EDH+aRSA+AESGCM:EDH+aRSA+SHA256:EDH+aRSA:EECDH:!aNULL:!eNULL:!MEDIUM:!LOW:!3DES:!MD5:!EXP:!PSK:!SRP:!DSS:!RC4:!SEED";

        ...
    }

If you refer to certificates and keys in Nginx that it didn't know before, you
have to restart it (instead of reloading the configuration). The reason is that
the Nginx process drops privileges after loading and root permissions are
required to read the certificates and keys.

A good resource to test your configuration and to disable weak ciphers is
`Qualys SSL Labs <https://www.ssllabs.com/ssltest/>`_.

Django's ``settings.py`` has to be updated as well to make sure it will only
hand out session cookies and CSRF tokens on a secure connection::

    # This CATMAID instance is served through SSL/TLS. Therefore, send session
    # cookies only over HTTPS and don't add CSRF tokens for non-HTTPS connections.
    SESSION_COOKIE_SECURE = True
    CSRF_COOKIE_SECURE = True
    # Assume a secure connection, if the X-FORWARDED-PROTO header is set to
    # 'https'. This implies that one has to make sure this head is only set to
    # 'https' if the connection is actually secure.
    SECURE_PROXY_SSL_HEADER = ('HTTP_X_FORWARDED_PROTO', 'https')

Please make also make sure that
you override the ``X-Forwarded-Proto`` header passed to Django. It should only
contain "https" if the connection is actually secure. Consult the `Django
documentation
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.6/ref/settings/#std:setting-SECURE_PROXY_SSL_HEADER>`_
to read more about this.

With this you should be able to provide a secure connection to your CATMAID
server.
